<strong>Starter Survival Guide</strong><br><i>Survival: The Art of not dying</i><br><br>Note: This guide is purposely kept short, additional guides are in the Guides tab on the left and a comprehensive survival guide can be found on the <a href="https://wiki.vintagestory.at/index.php?title=Survival_Guide_-_Your_first_day">wiki</a>.<br><br><strong>First tools</strong><br>Find <a href="handbook://item-flint">flint</a> or hard <a href="handbook://item-stone-granite">stones</a>. They can often be found loose on the ground. When you have 2 of them, <hk>shift</hk> + right-click to place one on the ground to begin <a href="handbook://craftinginfo-knapping">knapping</a>.<br><br><strong>Expanding inventory</strong><br>Your starting inventory has 10 slots, you can also carry up to 4 baskets or other containers. The most basic one, the <a href="handbook://item-basket">hand basket</a>, requires 10 cattails. Harvest cattails from reeds or papyrus, then hit 'E' to open your inventory to craft. The crafting recipe is on the <a href="handbook://item-basket">hand basket</a> page.<br><br><strong>Finding food</strong><br>An easy food source is berries from berry bushes. If you are feeling adventurous, attempt to hunt and kill an animal. Cooked cattail roots are a good emergency food. Keep an eye open for crops, they will be valuable food sources in the longer term. Once you found clay, be sure to get into <a href="handbook://craftinginfo-mealcooking">meal cooking</a> to greatly improve your nutrition intake.<br><br><strong>Fire / Light</strong><br><a href="handbook://craftinginfo-knapping">Knap</a> a knife and use it to gather <a href="handbook://item-drygrass">grass</a>. Place the grass on the ground, add 4 pieces of <a href="handbook://item-firewood">fire wood</a> and ignite it with a <a href="handbook://item-firestarter">Firestarter</a>. You can now use the firepit to cook roots and meat, or light torches that can be made from <a href="handbook://item-stick">sticks</a> and <a href="handbook://item-drygrass">dry grass</a>.<br><br><strong>Combat</strong><br>To hunt and kill in the stone age, craft yourself a <a href="handbook://item-spear-generic-flint">spear</a> or <a href="handbook://item-club-generic-wood">wooden club</a>. Put together some <a href="handbook://item-armor-body-improvised-wood">improvised armor</a> for some very basic protection.<br><br><strong>Shelter</strong><br>It is a good idea to build a small shelter before the night sets. Useful stone age building materials are <a href="handbook://block-cob-none">cob</a>, <a href="handbook://block-soil-low-none">soil</a>, <a href="handbook://block-packeddirt">packed dirt</a>, <a href="handbook://block-cobblestone-granite">cobble stone</a> from ruins and <a href="handbook://block-log-placed-oak-ud">logs.</a><br><br><strong>Preparing for winter</strong><br>On standard worlds, you have about 70 in-game days to prepare for the cold season, where you can no longer grow crops and wild animals yield less meat, and you can also suffer from the cold. It's recommended to stock up on food by <a href="handbook://gamemechanicinfo-foodpreservation">preserving it</a> and <a href="handbook://gamemechanicinfo-animalhusbandry">keeping animals</a>.<br><br>For further progression, see <a href="handbook://craftinginfo-progressionguide">Progression Guide</a>.
